Preferential subfunctionalization of slow-evolving
genes after allopolyploidization in Xenopus laevis
Marie Se´mon and Kenneth H. Wolfe*
Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland
Edited by Wen-Hsiung Li, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, and approved April 11, 2008 (received for review September 13, 2007)
As paleopolyploid genomes evolve, the expression profiles of
retained gene pairs are expected to diverge. To examine this
divergence process on a large scale in a vertebrate system, we
compare Xenopus laevis, which has retained 40% of loci in
duplicate after a recent whole-genome duplication (WGD), with its
unduplicated relative Silurana (Xenopus) tropicalis. This compari-
son of ingroup pairs to an outgroup allows the direction of change
in expression profiles to be inferred for a set of 1,300X. laevis pairs,
relative to their single orthologs in S. tropicalis, across 11 tissues.
We identify 68 pairs in which X. laevis is inferred to have under-
gone a significant reduction of expression in at least two tissues
since WGD. Of these pairs, one-third show evidence of subfunc-
tionalization, with decreases in the expression levels of different
gene copies in two different tissues. Surprisingly, we find that
genes with slow rates of evolution are particularly prone to
subfunctionalization, even when the tendency for highly ex-
pressed genes to evolve slowly is controlled for. We interpret this
result to be an effect of allopolyploidization. We then compare the
outcomes of this WGD with an independent one that happened in
the teleost fish lineage. We find that if a gene pair was retained in
duplicate in X. laevis, the orthologous pair is more likely to have
been retained in duplicate in zebrafish, suggesting that similar
factors, among them subfunctionalization, determined which gene
pairs survived in duplicate after the two WGDs.
rate of evolution  Silurana tropicalis  whole-genome duplication
Polyploidy, also termed whole-genome duplication (WGD) isa frequent phenomenon in eukaryotes (1). A WGD is
followed by extensive and rapid genome restructuring involving
many gene losses, so that only one of the two gene copies remains
in most genomes that underwent ancient polyploidization [for
example, fish and yeast (2, 3)]. Alterations in function are
expected among genes retained in duplicate. In some cases, one
copy may acquire a new function (neofunctionalization), while
the other keeps the ancestral function. The models of Lynch and
Force (4, 5) also propose the existence of subfunctionalization,
in which each copy retains a subset of the functions of the
ancestral gene. Sub and neofunctionalization models make
different predictions about the rate and symmetry of sequence
evolution in the duplicates.
Asymmetry in evolutionary rates between the protein se-
quences of the two copies is often interpreted as a footprint of
neofunctionalization, especially if it is associated with evidence
of positive selection in the accelerated copy (6). Several studies
of paleopolyploid genomes have shown that rate asymmetry
between the two copies can be widespread. For example, asym-
metry was seen in 6% of retained gene pairs in Xenopus laevis
and in 25–36% of pairs in teleost fishes (6–8). Relatively few
examples of subfunctionalization of duplicated genes have been
demonstrated so far, the best-known being those of fish mitf (9),
sox9 (10), synapsin (11), POMC (12),mbx (13), and the plant gene
RPL32-SODcp (14). A few studies have attempted to detect
subfunctionalization on a larger scale after WGD. Aury et al.
(15) used successive rounds ofWGD in Paramecium to test Force
et al.’s (5) prediction that subfunctionalized gene pairs should be
resistant to reduplication. Their results suggest that subfunction-
alization has occurred, but only rarely, in Paramecium genes.
Other studies of subfunctionalization after WGD have focused
on complementary amino acid substitution in protein pairs (6)
and on the differential loss of regulatory regions between
duplicated copies of developmental genes (16).
The most powerful method currently available to study the
divergence of function between duplicated genes on a large scale
is the analysis of their transcription profiles. Many studies have
shown expression divergence betweenWGD-duplicates (17–22).
However, a major obstacle encountered in all these studies is that
they could not differentiate between sub and neofunctionaliza-
tion because the pattern of expression before duplication was
unknown. This obstacle was overcome recently for gene pairs
that were formed by WGD in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by
comparing their pattern of expression to Candida albicans, an
outgroup whose genome was not duplicated and therefore can be
used to approximate the ancestral expression state (23).
Here, we apply a similar approach to search for evidence of gene
subfunctionalization after WGD in a vertebrate system. We com-
pare the expression profiles of gene pairs preserved in duplicate
after WGD in X. laevis to the expression profiles of orthologous
genes in the unduplicated clawed frog S. tropicalis (sometimes also
called X. tropicalis). TheWGD that has been proposed for X. laevis
has not yet been validated by a complete genome sequence, but it
is estimated to have occurred 21–54.6Mya (6, 24, 25) and it is likely
to have been an allopolyploidization because interspecies crosses in
Xenopus often produce fertile polyploid offspring and phylogenetic
studies have shown that other polyploid clawed frogs are ancient
allopolyploids (24, 26, 27).
We used the extensive expressed sequence tag (EST) and
cDNA sequence resources available for these species (20, 21, 25)
to detect genes present in one copy in S. tropicalis and in two
copies in X. laevis. We inferred the pattern of expression in these
triplets and detected events of subfunctionalization. We then
tested whether the subfunctionalized genes are a random subset
of the genome.
Results
Construction of the Dataset. We clustered Xenopus expressed
sequences (ESTs and full-length cDNAs) that are publicly
available (558,503 sequences for X. laevis and 1,046,555 for S.
tropicalis). We chose very stringent clustering parameters to
avoid merging sequences expressed by paralogous genes [see
Methods, supporting information (SI) Methods, and Fig. S1].
Using phylogenetic analysis, we built a dataset of 1,300 triplets,
composed of one gene in S. tropicalis and its two coorthologs in
X. laevis, whose duplication was most probably due to WGD.
Author contributions: M.S. and K.H.W. designed research; M.S. performed research; M.S.
analyzed data; and M.S. and K.H.W. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: khwolfe@tcd.ie.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/
0708705105/DCSupplemental.
© 2008 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0708705105 PNAS  June 17, 2008  vol. 105  no. 24  8333–8338
EV
O
LU
TI
O
N
An early study based on a very small dataset proposed that
77% of genes were retained in duplicate inX. laevis (28). By using
highly expressed genes to minimize errors associated with EST
sampling, we estimate that 32–47% of genes were retained in
double-copy in X. laevis afterWGD (SI Methods and Figs. S2 and
S3). Our figure is similar to Hellsten et al.’s (21) estimate of
25–50% retention. Gene loss has been less extensive after the
relatively recent WGD in X. laevis than after the teleost-specific
WGD, which is 10 times older (29, 30): In Tetraodon nigroviridis
for instance, only 15% of genes were retained in duplicate (7).
We estimated the gene expression profiles of each triplet based
on the tissue from which the ESTs were extracted. More precisely,
we obtained for each gene in each triplet a measure of its level of
expression in each of 11 tissues that had been used for library
construction in both species (seeMethods for a list). We measured
the conservation of these expression patterns between the two X.
laevis copies sinceWGDby a Spearman correlation coefficient.We
find that the majority of duplicate pairs do not show much diver-
gence in expression since WGD (median correlation rho  0.64;
Fig. S4), a result similar to that of Chain et al. (22).
Detection of Changes in Expression Profile: Subfunctionalization and
Asymmetric Changes. We used parsimony to estimate the pattern
of evolution of expression in each triplet. The principle of our
analysis is shown in Fig. 1. We say that a pair of duplicates in X.
laevis has become subfunctionalized if we infer that one gene
copy shows a significant decrease in expression level in one
tissue, whereas the other copy shows a significant decrease in a
different tissue (Fig. 1b). We modified slightly a statistical test
developed by Audic and Claverie (31) to take into account the
effect of WGD and subsequent gene losses on the relative
contribution of each gene to the total pool of mRNA in the cell
(see Methods, SI Methods, and Figs. S5 and S6). We performed
this test on the 1,300 triplets and found 61 examples of subfunc-
tionalization (4%). This number drops to 19 triplets (1.2%) if we
correct for multiple testing [false discovery rate (FDR)  0.05]
(32). These triplets are loci in which expression has been
significantly decreased in one X. laevis copy in one tissue and in
the other X. laevis copy in another tissue, whatever other changes
happened (significant or not) in the nine remaining tissues.
Among these 19 triplets, 15 have undergone significant changes
in exactly two tissues and no significant changes in the other
tissues (44 without correction for multiple testing).
We implemented another method to identify subfunctionaliza-
tion between the two X. laevis copies. We constructed for each
triplet the patternXlsum bymerging the patterns of expression of the
two X. laevis copies (summing the number of ESTs per million for
each tissue). Subfunctionalizations are cases where each of the
copies in X. laevis has retained part of the ancestral function;
therefore, the Spearman correlation of the patterns of expression
between S. tropicalis and Xlsum should be higher than both of the
correlations between S. tropicalis and the individual X. laevis genes.
This pattern was found in 11% of the triplets (144 triplets).
Cases of subfunctionalization, therefore, represent only a small
proportion (1.2–11%) of the WGD-duplicates considered here;
however, we have seen that most pairs have not diverged in
expression since theWGD (Fig. S4).We tested whether, among the
minority of genes that do show significant changes in expression in
our dataset, the pattern of changes frequently corresponds to a
subfunctionalization pattern. We searched in particular for two
patterns of expression profile change, which we refer to as sub-
functionalization and asymmetric change (Fig. 1 b and c). Both of
these patterns involve decreases of expression inX. laevis compared
with S. tropicalis. We detected 49 cases of asymmetric partitioning
of expression (109 without multiple testing), defined as triplets
where expression has decreased significantly in at least two tissues
since WGD, in the same X. laevis copy (Fig. 1c). Therefore, we
estimate that, among X. laevis gene pairs whose expression has
diverged significantly, one-third (19 of 68) are subfunctionalized,
which is less than the 50% expected by chance (P 0.01 by Fisher’s
test). This ratio remains constant if we only consider genes with
significant changes in exactly two tissues (Fig. 1e).
Relationship Between Rate of Sequence Evolution and Pattern of
Expression Divergence.We examined whether the rate of evolution
of a gene influences the evolution of its expression patterns after
WGD. Because duplication tends to increase the rate of nonsyn-
onymous sequence evolution [for instance, in Xenopus (21)], we
instead measured this rate (dN) between two species whose ge-
nomes have not been duplicated: S. tropicalis and human. This dN
value should be indicative of the gene’s evolutionary rate before
WGD. We find that genes that became subfunctionalized were
more slowly evolving beforeWGDthan the geneswith noparticular
pattern of expression evolution (median dN values 0.154 and 0.214
respectively; P 0.018 with two repetitions is significant at a 3.6%
level; Fig. 2a). We consider this difference as biologically mean-
ingful, even though its significance is marginal after Bonferroni
correction, because the median dN is 40% lower in subfunctional-
ized genes than in the other genes, and because the power of the test
is not very high given the small size of the datasets. In contrast, there
is no significant rate difference between genes that later underwent
an asymmetric pattern of expression evolution inX. laevis and those
with no particular pattern of expression change (P 0.97; Fig. 2a).
This preferential subfunctionalization of slowly evolving genes
was unexpected. It is not a bias because of differences in
mutation rate or in the age of the duplicates, because the levels
of synonymous substitution are not significantly different among
the three categories of genes (Fig. 2b). There is, however,
another possible bias. By construction, the triplets with either
subfunctionalization or asymmetric change of expression are
expressed in more tissues and at a higher level than triplets that
do not show these patterns (Fig. 2c), and it is known that genes
expressed in many tissues evolve more slowly than other genes
(33, 34). However, after correcting for this bias we still find that
genes that became subfunctionalized are descended from excep-
tionally slowly evolving ancestors (Fig. 3a; P  0.009 with four
St
Xl2
Xl1
t1 t2
 subfunctionalization  asymmetric
t1 t2
divergence in
at least 2 tissues
divergence in
exactly 2 tissues
19 (61) 49 (109)
15 (44) 41 (93)
0.01 (0.01)
0.02 (0.003)
Fisher test p-value
 level of expression:
high
low
a b c
d
e
Fig. 1. Principles of expression evolution in Xenopus sequence triplets. (a)
Each triplet includes one gene in S. tropicalis (St) and its two coorthologs in X.
laevis (Xl1 and Xl2) created by WGD. (b) A case of subfunctionalization.
Columns t1 and t2 represent two tissues. Arrows represent the results of
statistical tests and point to the gene with the significantly lower expression
level. Here, expression of gene Xl1 in tissue t1 is significantly lower than
expression of both St and Xl2 in the same tissue. In tissue t2, gene Xl2 shows
lower expression.We infer that the gene was expressed in both tissues t1 and
t2 before WGD and that subsequently the expression of Xl1 decreased in t1,
whereas expression of its paralog Xl2 decreased in t2; this corresponds to a
subfunctionalization pattern. (c) A case of asymmetric evolution of expres-
sion. Significant decreases in expression are inferred inX. laevis in two tissues,
but they both involve the sameX. laevis gene (here,Xl1). (d) Numbers of gene
triplets showing subfunctionalization and asymmetric patterns of expression
evolutionas definedabove.Numbers inparentheses donot include correction
for multiple testing. P values by Fisher’s test show that asymmetric evolution
of expression is more frequent than subfunctionalization. (e) Numbers of
triplets with subfunctionalized and asymmetric patterns of expression, de-
fined as caseswhere there is a significant decrease of expression in exactly two
tissues, and no significant decrease in the other nine tissues.
8334  www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0708705105 Se´mon and Wolfe
repetitions is significant at a 3.6% level). Moreover, this method
of analysis also shows an opposite pattern in genes that
developed asymmetric expression patterns after WGD: The
ancestors of these genes were unusually quickly evolving (Fig. 3b;
P  0.001 with four repetitions is significant at a 0.4% level).
These results are very surprising because they show that the rate
of sequence evolution before the duplication influences the
pattern of evolution of expression after the duplication.
We then asked whether the triplets of genes with subfunc-
tionalization or asymmetric patterns of expression evolution
have a particular rate of evolution afterWGD.We computed the
nonsynonymous divergence between the two paralogous copies
in X. laevis and compared the mean values among groups with
different patterns of expression evolution (Fig. 2d). Nonsynony-
mous divergence between X. laevis copies is significantly smaller
for subfunctionalized genes (median dN: 0.023) than for genes
with no particular pattern of expression evolution (median dN:
0.031; P  0.01 by Wilcoxon test with two repetitions is signif-
icant at a 2% level). This effect is only marginally significant after
correction for expression bias (Fig. 3c, P  0.03 with four
repetitions is marginally significant at a 12% level). Genes with
an asymmetric pattern of evolution do not have a particular rate
of evolution after duplication (Fig. 3d; P 0.08 is not significant
after Bonferroni correction). We also evaluated the asymmetry
in the rates of nonsynonymous substitution between the two
copies in X. laevis, using like-tri-test (35), but we found no link
between sequence asymmetry and the pattern of expression
evolution (Fig. 2f ). A recent study showed that rates of nonsyn-
onymous sequence evolution increased after WGD in X. laevis
sequences, but this was a small effect only visible after concat-
enation of the sequences (21). Therefore, it is possible that
nonsynonymous rates of evolution are asymmetric after dupli-
cation, but this effect is not visible on a gene-by-gene basis.
Convergent Outcomes of Two Independent WGDs in Teleost Fish and
X. laevis. We have seen that subfunctionalized genes in X. laevis
are distinctive because they were slowly evolving before WGD.
Therefore, it is possible that some genes are more prone to
subfunctionalization than others. To test this hypothesis, we
compared the outcomes of two WGDs that occurred indepen-
dently in vertebrates: one in X. laevis and one at the base of
teleost fish lineage. First, we tested the null hypothesis that the
two WGDs should have independent results in terms of double-
copy retentions. In other words, whether a gene pair was or was
not retained in duplicate in X. laevis should have no bearing on
whether or not its orthologous pair was retained in fish. Because
the genome of zebrafish has been completely sequenced, we can
assess with certainty whether a gene pair was retained in two
copies in this species after its WGD, whereas this is not feasible
none
asymmetric
Number
of genes
603
26
48
dN dS
0.214
0.246
0.221
0.233
0.154
0.175
2.975
3.020
3.351
3.821
2.950
2.999
0.018
0.97
0.59
0.40
# ESTs in St
45
76
89
191
109
140
Expression
evolution
p
re
-d
up
lic
at
io
n
S
t 
vs
. h
um
an
a
subfunc.
none
asymmetric
Number
of genes
1071
42
86
dN dS
0.029
0.034
0.023
0.027
0.214
0.206
0.206
0.215
0.206
0.209
0.01
0.11
0.87
0.65
Degree of 
asymmetry in dN
0.202
0.243
0.248
0.286
0.765
0.218
 0.15
0.31
Expression
evolution
p
os
t-
d
up
lic
at
io
n
X
l1
 v
s.
 X
l2
subfunc.
0.031
0.039
b c
d e f
*
*
*
*
Fig. 2. Ratesof sequenceevolutionare correlatedwithexpressionevolution.
Patterns of expression evolution are classified as subfunctionalized or asym-
metric as in Fig. 1e; ‘‘none’’ refers to triplets that show neither of these
patterns.dN,dS, and #ESTs are, respectively, the levels of nonsynonymous and
synonymous sequence evolution and the number of ESTs in S. tropicalis (St).
The median and mean of these variables are indicated (above and below,
respectively), and P values for Wilcoxon tests for the pairwise comparison
between the set ‘‘none’’ and each of the other sets of genes are shown near
the arrows. Significant P values after Bonferroni correction (two test repeti-
tions per panel) are indicated in red and marked with an asterisk. (a–c)
Preduplication rates of sequence evolution are estimated between S. tropi-
calis and human. (d–f ) Postduplication rates are computed between the two
copies in X. laevis (Xl1 and Xl2).
subfunctionalized asymmetric
P = 0.03 P = 0.08
P =  0.009 P = 0.001
p
re
-d
up
lic
at
io
n
p
os
t-
d
up
lic
at
io
n
a b
c d
N = 26 N = 48
N = 43 N = 83
0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 0.22
0
50
10
0
15
0
0.14 0.16 0.18 0.20 0.22
0.025 0.030 0.035 0.020 0.024 0.028 0.032
0
40
80
12
0
0
40
80
12
0
0
10
0
15
0
10
0
15
0
50
* *
Fig. 3. The rate of nonsynonymous sequence evolution (dN) before the
duplication influences the pattern of evolution of expression after the dupli-
cation. Shownare comparisons of anobservedmediandN value (red line)with
a histogram of the distribution of expected values; the x axis in each panel is
in dN units, and the y axis shows the number of genes in the histogram. P
values for the comparisons between the observed values and the distributions
are shown. Asterisks mark tests that are significant at a 5% level after
Bonferroni correction for the four test repetitions. (a) The median value
(0.154) of dN(human, S. tropicalis) for the set of 26 genes that show subfunction-
alization in X. laevis and have an annotated ortholog in human is
superimposed on a histogram showing the distribution of median values of
dN(human, S. tropicalis) obtained from1,000 samples. Each of these samples contains
100 genes chosen randomly from triplets with neither subfunctionalized nor
asymmetric pattern of evolution of expression, such that the distribution of
the levels of expression (measured in S. tropicalis) in each sample is the same
as in the distribution observed in the set of 26 subfunctionalized genes. (b–d)
Comparisons of observed median dN values with histograms of the distribu-
tions ofmedian dN values obtained from same-size samples of genes showing
no significant expression evolution and after correction for expression level.
The four panels compare the observed median dN values (red line) of loci
whose X. laevis coorthologs show either subfunctionalization (a and c) or
asymmetric (b and d) patterns of expression evolution, to distributions sam-
pled from triplets that do not show such patterns and after correction for
expression level. a and b show dN values calculated between S. tropicalis and
human, representing the preduplication rate of evolution, and c and d show
dN values calculated from comparisons between the X. laevis coorthologs,
representing the postduplication rate.
Se´mon and Wolfe PNAS  June 17, 2008  vol. 105  no. 24  8335
EV
O
LU
TI
O
N
in X. laevis. We identified reliable orthologs in zebrafish for half
of our triplets (529 genes; Fig. 4a). The fraction of these families
that contain two WGD coorthologs in zebrafish is 9.5% (51 of
529). This fraction is significantly higher than the corresponding
fraction for gene families in which only one X. laevis copy was
found (6.8%; 226 of 3,305; Fig. 4b; P  0.036 by Fisher’s test).
The latter set corresponds to families for which we did not detect
a second gene in X. laevis, which in some cases might have been
because no EST was sampled rather than because the gene is
truly single-copy in X. laevis. For this reason, our test is a
conservative one, and we conclude that genes retained in
duplicate after one vertebrate WGD event have increased
probability of also having been retained after the other.
What is the reason for this convergence? It has been shown that
highly expressed genes are overretained after WGD (15, 36). If
expression level differences are responsible for the nonindepen-
dence of the two WGDs, we would expect that highly expressed
genes should have higher frequencies of retention in duplicate than
weakly expressed genes, after both WGDs. We divided our dataset
of Xenopus-fish orthologs into two classes depending on their
expression level in S. tropicalis (low or high; Fig. 4c) and observed
that the proportion of genes retained in duplicate in zebrafish is
higher (12%; 32 of 262) for genes highly expressed in S. tropicalis
than for low-expression genes (7%; 19 of 267; P 0.04 by Fisher’s
test). The genes responsible for the nonindependence of the two
duplications are therefore highly expressed.
We can ask whether these highly expressed genes have been
retained for the same reason after the twoWGDs. By definition,
subfunctionalized genes are expressed in several tissues and they
are also highly expressed (Fig. 2c), so it is possible that the genes
convergently retained in duplicate after the two WGDs are
enriched in subfunctionalized genes. Indeed, we find that genes
that have been subfunctionalized in X. laevis have a higher
frequency of parallel retention in zebrafish (22%; 4 of 18; Fig.
4d) than do those that show no pattern of expression divergence
or an asymmetric divergence pattern (8 and 16%, respectively;
data from Fig. 4d; P  0.037 by 2 test of homogeneity among
these three categories). These results suggest that gene pairs
retained by subfunctionalization in X. laevis also tended to be
retained by subfunctionalization in zebrafish. Unfortunately, we
cannot directly test whether these pairs have been subfunction-
alized in zebrafish, because no expression data are available for
any outgroup species that diverged shortly before the teleost
WGD. However, our hypothesis of convergent subfunctional-
ization receives some support from a comparison of the diver-
gence of expression profiles between the pairs in zebrafish and
in X. laevis (Fig. S7).
Discussion
In their pioneering study of 17 duplicated genes in X. laevis,
Hughes and Hughes (28) already noticed that in four cases the
two copies were expressed in different tissues or at different
developmental times, and this trend was confirmed recently in
larger datasets (20, 21). We detect relatively little subfunction-
alization in our dataset (1.2–11% of the WGD-duplicates con-
sidered). This may be because most pairs have not diverged in
expression since the WGD and subfunctionalization actually
only happened in a small percentage of pairs. Alternatively, our
ability to detect subfunctionalization is perhaps limited. If we
had complete information about transcription in every tissue, we
could more accurately detect significant expression divergence
between gene pairs in some particular tissues and hence obtain
a reliable estimate of the fraction of genes undergoing subfunc-
tionalization. The frequency of subfunctionalization we estimate
here is a lower limit, because we examined a limited number of
tissues, but we cannot propose an upper bound for this figure.
Even though we were not able to estimate the frequency of
subfunctionalization, we could still examine the characteristics of
genes that became subfunctionalized.
We find that some genes are predisposed to subfunctional-
ization. Genes that underwent subfunctionalization in X. laevis
tend to be slowly evolving in other species, and conversely genes
with an asymmetric pattern of expression evolution in X. laevis
tend to evolve faster than expected in these outgroups. These
results are only of medium statistical significance, partly because
the limited size of the datasets weakens the power of the tests,
and partly because of the necessity to correct for multiple testing.
Nonetheless, we observed that the rate of sequence evolution
influences the retention of some genes after WGD, and we
propose a model to explain our observations.
Genes retained in duplicate after WGD are more likely to
belong to gene families with slow rates of sequence evolution (7,
37, 38) or high expression levels (15, 36). Slow sequence evolu-
tion is correlated with a high level (or wide breadth) of expres-
sion in both yeast and vertebrates (33, 39), and both observations
may be due to the same phenomenon. Davis and Petrov (37)
were unable to find an obvious explanation for their discovery
that slowly evolving genes are preferentially retained in dupli-
cate, but they suggested that the bias may be an indirect
correlation due to a third variable that is responsible for the
retention and is correlated with the other two. Candidates for
this third variable include the presence of many cis-regulatory
regions (5, 40), of genes coding for multidomain proteins (41),
and pleiotropic genes (model 3 in ref. 42). Other models predict
that genes with a particular function, such as regulatory genes
(43), should be retained in duplicate more often than expected
after WGD. Alternatively there may be a direct relationship
between the expression level (or the rate of sequence evolution)
and the propensity to be retained in duplicate. Highly expressed
genes may be retained in duplicate after WGD simply because
they are beneficial for gene dosage (15). We discuss below that
the rate of evolution seems to be directly responsible for
double-copy retention in Xenopus, at least for the subset of gene
pairs whose expression is divergent.
We have shown that slowly evolving genes are more subject to
subfunctionalization. Theoretical studies of subfunctionalization
51 478
226 3079
H: 32
L: 19
H: 230
L: 248
Dr2
Dr1
human
Dr
human
Dr2
Dr1
human
St
Xl2
Xl1
Dr
human
St 
Xl2
Xl1
S: 4
N: 39
A: 7
S: 14
N: 426
A: 35
XX
St 
Xl
?
St 
Xl
?
DD D
DD D
XX
XX
X
DDD
a
b
c
d
Fig. 4. Comparison of genes retained in double-copy in X. laevis and in
zebrafish shows that the two independent WGDs do not have independent
outcomes. (a) 529 triplets with two copies in X. laevis (designated XX) were
sorted into groups whose orthologs in zebrafish are double-copy or single-
copy (designated DD and D, respectively). Zebrafish gene pairs (Dr1 and Dr2)
in the same Homolens family were attributed to the teleost WGD if their
duplication is older than the speciation of zebrafish and pufferfish. (b) 3305
doublets (designated X) for which we could not find a second copy in X. laevis
were sorted similarly according to their duplication status in zebrafish. (c)
Distribution of the 529 XX triplets by their expression level in S. tropicalis (two
classes: H, high; L, low) and their duplication status in zebrafish. (d) Distribu-
tion of the 529 XX triplets by their pattern of expression evolution (three
classes: S, subfunctionalization; A, asymmetric partitioning; N, neither) and
their duplication status in zebrafish.
8336  www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0708705105 Se´mon and Wolfe
do not predict that genes becoming subfunctionalized should
evolve more slowly than others before duplication (5, 40). On the
contrary, subfunctionalization is supposed to be a neutral event
that occurs because of neutral mutations impairing different
subfunctions in the duplicates. Because we correct for expression
bias (Fig. 3), we show more exactly that among a pool of genes
with the same level of expression, slowly evolving genes are more
likely to be subfunctionalized, and fast evolving genes are more
likely to have an asymmetric pattern of expression evolution. We
can extrapolate that genes that are subfunctionalized are going
to be retained in two copies in the genome (both copies are
necessary to perform the ancestral function), but, in contrast, it
is likely that many genes with an asymmetric pattern of evolution
of expression will eventually return to single-copy state. This is
confirmed by our comparison between WGDs in Xenopus and
zebrafish: subfunctionalized genes in Xenopus, but not genes
with an asymmetric pattern of expression evolution, are retained
in two copies more than expected in zebrafish.
These observations lead us to propose that slowly evolving
genes were more easily subfunctionalized in X. laevis and there-
fore more easily retained long after WGD. Our model of gene
evolution after WGD in X. laevis is illustrated in Fig. 5, which is
based on the assumption that the WGD was an allopolyploidiza-
tion, as is most likely (26, 27). Most models to explain gene
retention after WGD postulate that the two copies are equal at
birth (e.g., refs. 5, 43) but this is not true in the case of
allopolyploidization. In our model, two diverging populations
accumulate sequence differences, but to a greater extent in
faster-evolving genes than in slower-evolving genes. When their
two genomes are merged by allopolyploidization, the slower-
evolving loci have accumulated fewer substitutions so the two
copies may still be interchangeable and subfunctionalization can
occur. In contrast, in the faster-evolving genes it is more likely
that there are functional differences between the two copies, and
one of them functions better than the other. If so, it may be
deleterious for the better-functioning gene copy to lose any of its
subfunctions. Such a situation will prevent subfunctionalization
from happening; instead, the worse-functioning gene copy will
be lost completely. In X. laevis, we observe the consequences of
an allopolyploidization of medium age, where nearly half the
genes are still in duplicate. For the fast-evolving genes in this
genome we tend to see an asymmetry in the expression patterns
and we anticipate that the worse-functioning copy will be lost
eventually. Our observations and our model contradict a previ-
ous hypothesis by Spring (44), who suggested that slower-
evolving genes would be more redundant at the time of al-
lopolyploidization and therefore easier to lose.
Note that our model is also valid for an autopolyploidization
or any other kind of gene duplication, if the genes can survive in
duplicate long enough to attain sequence divergence. In each
case the genes with slower rates of nonsynonymous substitution
are expected to remain equivalent (and therefore prone to
subfunctionalization) for a longer time. This hypothesis is sup-
ported by our laboratory’s previous work on WGD in yeast,
where we found that slow-evolving genes retained their inter-
changeability for a longer time period after WGD than fast-
evolving genes (45, 46). If this idea is correct it can account for
the preferential retention of slow-evolving genes after any kind
of duplication, as seen by Davis and Petrov (37). Thus, subfunc-
tionalization may be a force in the long-term evolution of
duplicated genes, in addition to its originally postulated role (5)
in their initial preservation.
Methods
The methods we used for stringent EST clustering, building triplets of homol-
ogous Xenopus genes, establishing orthology relationships, and estimating
rates of sequence evolution are described in SIMethods. The derivation of our
estimate that 32–47%of geneswere retained in double-copy inX. laevis after
WGD is also given in SI Methods.
To estimate expression profiles of frog genes, we classified the available
Xenopus EST libraries into tissues (104 libraries in X. laevis, 51 in S. tropicalis)
and identified the following 11 tissues (or developmental stages) as being
common between the two species: brain, embryo, heart, kidney, liver, lung,
ovary, skin, spleen, tadpole, and testis. By construction, each contig in a triplet
is composedof ESTs thatwere used to infer its pattern of expression. Zebrafish
EST analysis is described in SI Methods.
To detect differences in expression level between the two copies in X. laevis
(denoted Xl1 and Xl2) and S. tropicalis (St) in one tissue, we used Audic and
Claverie’s Bayesian test (31), which takes the total number of ESTs sequenced in
each tissue fromeach species into account.Wemodified the test slightly because
thenull expectation is that theEST countofgene St shouldbe1.3 timesgreater
(exact value: e0.26; see SIMethods) than the individual EST counts of its orthologs
Xl1 and Xl2. To detect a significant decrease in the expression of gene Xl1 in a
particular tissue we tested whether, for this tissue in the two species, (i) the EST
countofXl1e0.26 is significantly lowerthanthecountofSt,and(ii) theESTcount
of Xl2 e0.26 is not significantly lower than the count of St.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank G. Conant for help with computing of
asymmetry of sequence evolution; L. Gue´guen for help with FDR and tree
parsing; and K. Byrne, G. Conant, B. Cusack, C. Frank, J. Gordon, N. Khaldi, J.
Mower, D. Scannell,M.Webster,M.Woolfit, and two anonymous referees for
helpful comments. This work was supported by Irish Research Council for
Science, Engineering and Technology and the Science Foundation Ireland.
1. Otto SP,Whitton J (2000) Polyploid incidenceandevolution.AnnuRevGenet34:401–437.
2. Jaillon O, et al. (2004) Genome duplication in the teleost fish Tetraodon nigroviridis
reveals the early vertebrate proto-karyotype. Nature 431:946–957.
3. Scannell DR, Byrne KP, Gordon JL, Wong S, Wolfe KH (2006) Multiple rounds of
speciation associated with reciprocal gene loss in polyploid yeasts. Nature 440:341–
345.
ancestral
gene 
split of
populations
allopolyploid
formation
divergence
fast-evolving 
gene
slow-evolving 
gene
time
loss of one copy
subfunctionalization
Fig. 5. Model to explain why slowly evolving genes are preferentially
subfunctionalized after allopolyploidization. The horizontal axis represents
time. Initially two populations diverge and their genes begin to accumulate
sequence differences, represented by color changes and vertical separation.
They subsequently hybridize to form an allopolyploid. For a fast-evolving
gene (Upper), the two copies are very different at the time of allopolyploid
formation. They are unlikely to be functionally indistinguishable, and it is
probable that only the better-functioning one of themwill be retained. For a
slow-evolving gene (Lower), the two copies are less different and more likely
to be able to replace one another functionally. Subfunctionalization (repre-
sented by thinning of the lines) may result.
Se´mon and Wolfe PNAS  June 17, 2008  vol. 105  no. 24  8337
EV
O
LU
TI
O
N
4. Lynch M, Force A (2000) The probability of duplicate gene preservation by subfunc-
tionalization. Genetics 154:459–473.
5. Force A, et al. (1999) Preservation of duplicate genes by complementary, degenerative
mutations. Genetics 151:1531–1545.
6. Chain FJ, Evans BJ (2006) Multiple mechanisms promote the retained expression of
gene duplicates in the tetraploid frog Xenopus laevis. PLoS Genet 2:e56.
7. Brunet FG, et al. (2006) Gene loss and evolutionary rates following whole-genome
duplication in teleost fishes. Mol Biol Evol 23:1808–1816.
8. Steinke D, Salzburger W, Braasch I, Meyer A (2006) Many genes in fish have species-
specific asymmetric rates of molecular evolution. BMC Genomics 7:20.
9. Altschmied J, et al. (2002) Subfunctionalizationof duplicatemitf genes associatedwith
differential degeneration of alternative exons in fish. Genetics 161:259–267.
10. Cresko WA, et al. (2003) Genome duplication, subfunction partitioning, and lineage
divergence: Sox9 in stickleback and zebrafish. Dev Dyn 228:480–489.
11. Yu WP, Brenner S, Venkatesh B (2003) Duplication, degeneration and subfunctional-
ization of the nested synapsin-Timp genes in Fugu. Trends Genet 19:180–183.
12. de Souza FS, Bumaschny VF, Low MJ, Rubinstein M (2005) Subfunctionalization of
expression and peptide domains following the ancient duplication of the proopio-
melanocortin gene in teleost fishes. Mol Biol Evol 22:2417–2427.
13. Chang L, Khoo B, Wong L, Tropepe V (2006) Genomic sequence and spatiotemporal
expression comparison of zebrafish mbx1 and its paralog, mbx2. Dev Genes Evol
216:647–654.
14. Cusack BP, Wolfe KH (2007) When gene marriages don’t work out: Divorce by sub-
functionalization. Trends Genet 23:270–272.
15. Aury JM, et al. (2006) Global trends of whole-genome duplications revealed by the
ciliate Paramecium tetraurelia. Nature 444:171–178.
16. Woolfe A, Elgar G (2007) Comparative genomics using Fugu reveals insights into
regulatory subfunctionalization. Genome Biol 8:R53.
17. Casneuf T, De Bodt S, Raes J, Maere S, Van de Peer Y (2006) Nonrandom divergence of
gene expression following gene and genome duplications in the flowering plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. Genome Biol 7:R13.
18. Blanc G, Wolfe KH (2004) Functional divergence of duplicated genes formed by
polyploidy during Arabidopsis evolution. Plant Cell